@subsubheading Description

Standardized fertility measure and socio-economic indicators for each of 47
French-speaking provinces of Switzerland at about 1888.

@subsubheading Format

@table @code
@item Fertility
Ig, ‘common standardized fertility measure’.
@item Agriculture
% of males involved in agriculture as occupation.
@item Examination
% draftees receiving highest mark on army examination.
@item Education
% education beyond primary school for draftees.
@item Catholic
% ‘Catholic’ (as opposed to ‘Protestant’).
@item InfantMortality
Live births who live less than 1 year.
@end table

All variables but ‘Fertility’ give proportions of the population.

@subsubheading Source

(paraphrasing Mosteller and Tukey):

Switzerland, in 1888, was entering a period known as the demographic transition;
i.e., its fertility was beginning to fall from the high level typical of
underdeveloped countries.

The data collected are for 47 French-speaking “provinces” at about 1888.

Here, all variables are scaled to [0, 100], where in the original, all but
@code{Catholic} were scaled to [0, 1].

@subsubheading Note

Files for all 182 districts in 1888 and other years have been available at 
@url{https://opr.princeton.edu/archive/pefp/switz.aspx}.

They state that variables @code{Examination} and @code{Education} are averages
for 1887, 1888 and 1889.

@subsubheading References

Becker, R. A., Chambers, J. M. and Wilks, A. R. (1988). @cite{The New S
Language}. Monterey: Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole.

@subsubheading Examples

@example
@INCLUDE_DATASET_EXAMPLE_SCRIPT{swiss_1.m}
@end example
