@subsubheading Description

Operational data of a plant for the oxidation of ammonia to nitric acid.

@subsubheading Format

@table @code
@item AirFlow
Flow of cooling air.
@item WaterTemp
Cooling Water Inlet temperature.
@item AcidConc
Concentration of acid (per 1000, minus 500).
@item StackLoss
Stack loss
@end table

@subsubheading Details

“Obtained from 21 days of operation of a plant for the oxidation of ammonia
(NH3) to nitric acid (HNO3). The nitric oxides produced are absorbed in a
countercurrent absorption tower”. (Brownlee, cited by Dodge, slightly reformatted by MM.)

@code{AirFlow} represents the rate of operation of the plant. @code{WaterTemp} is the
temperature of cooling water circulated through coils in the absorption tower.
@code{AcidConc} is the concentration of the acid circulating, minus 50, times 10:
that is, 89 corresponds to 58.9 per cent acid. @code{StackLoss} (the dependent variable)
is 10 times the percentage of the ingoing ammonia to the plant that escapes from
the absorption column unabsorbed; that is, an (inverse) measure of the over-all
efficiency of the plant.

@subsubheading Source

Brownlee, K. A. (1960, 2nd ed. 1965). @cite{Statistical Theory and Methodology
in Science and Engineering}. New York: Wiley. pp. 491–500.

@subsubheading References

Becker, R. A., Chambers, J. M. and Wilks, A. R. (1988). @cite{The New S
Language}. Monterey: Wadsworth & Brooks/Cole.

Dodge, Y. (1996). The guinea pig of multiple regression. In: @cite{Robust
Statistics, Data Analysis, and Computer Intensive Methods; In Honor of
Peter Huber’s 60th Birthday}, 1996, @cite{Lecture Notes in Statistics}
109, Springer-Verlag, New York.

@subsubheading Examples

@example
@INCLUDE_DATASET_EXAMPLE_SCRIPT{stackloss_1.m}
@end example
