@subsubheading Description

An experiment on the pharmacokinetics of theophylline.

@subsubheading Format

@table @code
@item Subject
Categorical identifying the subject on whom the observation was made. The
ordering is by increasing maximum concentration of theophylline observed.
@item Wt
Weight of the subject (kg).
@item Dose
Dose of theophylline administerred orally to the subject (mg/kg).
@item Time
Time since drug administration when the sample was drawn (hr).
@item conc
Theophylline concentration in the sample (mg/L).
@end table

@subsubheading Details

Boeckmann, Sheiner and Beal (1994) report data from a study by Dr. Robert
Upton of the kinetics of the anti-asthmatic drug theophylline. Twelve subjects
were given oral doses of theophylline then serum concentrations were measured
at 11 time points over the next 25 hours.

These data are analyzed in Davidian and Giltinan (1995) and Pinheiro and Bates
(2000) using a two-compartment open pharmacokinetic model, for which a
self-starting model function, SSfol, is available.

@subsubheading Source

The data are given in Box & Jenkins (1976). Obtained from the Time Series Data
Library at @url{http://www-personal.buseco.monash.edu.au/~hyndman/TSDL/}.

@subsubheading References

Boeckmann, A. J., Sheiner, L. B. and Beal, S. L. (1994). @cite{NONMEM Users
Guide: Part V}. NONMEM Project Group, University of California, San Francisco.

Davidian, M. and Giltinan, D. M. (1995). @cite{Nonlinear Models for Repeated
Measurement Data}. London: Chapman & Hall. (section 5.5, p. 145 and section 6.6, p. 176)

Pinheiro, J. C. and Bates, D. M. (2000). @cite{Mixed-effects Models in
S and S-PLUS}. New York: Springer. (Appendix A.29)

@subsubheading Examples

@example
@INCLUDE_DATASET_EXAMPLE_SCRIPT{Theoph_1.m}
@end example
