@subsubheading Description

Distribution of hair and eye color and sex in 592 statistics students.

@subsubheading Format

This data set comes in multiple variables

@table @code
@item n
A 3-dimensional array containing the counts of students in each bucket. It
is arranged as hair-by-eye-by-sex.
@item hair
Hair colors for the indexes along dimension 1.
@item eye
Eye colors for the indexes along dimension 2.
@item sex
Sexes for the indexes along dimension 3.
@end table

@subsubheading Details

The Hair x Eye table comes rom a survey of students at the University of
Delaware reported by Snee (1974). The split by Sex was added by Friendly
(1992a) for didactic purposes.

This data set is useful for illustrating various techniques for the analysis
of contingency tables, such as the standard chi-squared test or, more
generally, log-linear modelling, and graphical methods such as mosaic plots,
sieve diagrams or association plots.

@subsubheading Source

@url{http://euclid.psych.yorku.ca/ftp/sas/vcd/catdata/haireye.sas}

Snee (1974) gives the two-way table aggregated over Sex. The Sex split of 
the ‘Brown hair, Brown eye’ cell was changed to agree with that used by
Friendly (2000).

@subsubheading References

Snee, R. D. (1974). Graphical display of two-way contingency tables.
@cite{The American Statistician}, 28, 9–12.

Friendly, M. (1992a). Graphical methods for categorical data. @cite{SAS User
Group International Conference Proceedings}, 17, 190–200.
@url{http://www.math.yorku.ca/SCS/sugi/sugi17-paper.html}

Friendly, M. (1992b). Mosaic displays for loglinear models. @cite{Proceedings
of the Statistical Graphics Section}, American Statistical Association, pp.
61–68. @url{http://www.math.yorku.ca/SCS/Papers/asa92.html}

Friendly, M. (2000). @cite{Visualizing Categorical Data}. SAS Institute,
ISBN 1-58025-660-0.

@subsubheading Examples

@example
@INCLUDE_DATASET_EXAMPLE_SCRIPT{HairEyeColor_1.m}
@end example
