@subsubheading Description

Data of 3000 male criminals over 20 years old undergoing their sentences in the
chief prisons of England and Wales.

@subsubheading Format

This dataset contains three separate variables. The @code{finger_length} and
@code{body_height} variables correspond to the rows and columns of the
@code{count} matrix.

@table @code
@item finger_length
Midpoints of intervals of finger lengths (cm).
@item body_height
Body heights (cm).
@item count
Number of prisoners in this bin.
@end table

@subsubheading Details

Student is the pseudonym of William Sealy Gosset. In his 1908 paper he wrote
(on page 13) at the beginning of section VI entitled Practical Test of the
forgoing Equations:

“Before I had succeeded in solving my problem analytically, I had endeavoured
to do so empirically. The material used was a correlation table containing
the height and left middle finger measurements of 3000 criminals, from a
paper by W. R. MacDonell (Biometrika, Vol. I., p. 219). The measurements
were written out on 3000 pieces of cardboard, which were then very thoroughly
shuffled and drawn at random. As each card was drawn its numbers were written
down in a book, which thus contains the measurements of 3000 criminals in a
random order. Finally, each consecutive set of 4 was taken as a sample—750
in all—and the mean, standard deviation, and correlation of each sample 
etermined. The difference between the mean of each sample and the mean of
the population was then divided by the standard deviation of the sample, giving
us the z of Section III.”

The table is in fact page 216 and not page 219 in MacDonell(1902). In the
MacDonell table, the middle finger lengths were given in mm and the heights
in feet/inches intervals, they are both converted into cm here. The midpoints
of intervals were used, e.g., where MacDonell has “4' 7"9/16 -- 8"9/16”, we
have 142.24 which is 2.54*56 = 2.54*(4' 8").

MacDonell credited the source of data (page 178) as follows: “The data on which
the memoir is based were obtained, through the kindness of Dr Garson, from the
Central Metric Office, New Scotland Yard... He pointed out on page 179 that:
“The forms were drawn at random from the mass on the office shelves; we are
therefore dealing with a random sampling.”

@subsubheading Source

@url{http://pbil.univ-lyon1.fr/R/donnees/criminals1902.txt} thanks to Jean R.
Lobry and Anne-Béatrice Dufour.

@subsubheading References

Garson, J.G. (1900). The metric system of identification of criminals, as used
in in Great Britain and Ireland. @cite{The Journal of the Anthropological
Institute of Great Britain and Ireland}, 30, 161–198.

MacDonell, W.R. (1902). On criminal anthropometry and the identification of
criminals. @cite{Biometrika}, 1(2), 177–227.

Student (1908). The probable error of a mean. @code{Biometrika}, 6, 1–25.

@subsubheading Examples

@example
@INCLUDE_DATASET_EXAMPLE_SCRIPT{crimtab_1.m}
@end example
