@subsubheading Description

@code{UKDriverDeaths} is a time series giving the monthly totals of car drivers in Great Britain killed
or seriously injured Jan 1969 to Dec 1984. Compulsory wearing of seat belts
was introduced on 31 Jan 1983.

@code{Seatbelts} is more information on the same problem.

@subsubheading Format

@code{UKDriverDeaths} is a table with the following variables:

@table @code
@item month
Month of the observation.
@item deaths
Number of deaths.
@end table

@code{Seatbelts} is a table with the following variables:

@table @code
@item month
Month of the observation.
@item DriversKilled
Car drivers killed.
@item drivers
Same as @code{UKDriverDeaths} @code{deaths} count.
@item front
Front-seat passengers killed or seriously injured.
@item rear
Rear-seat passengers killed or seriously injured.
@item kms
Distance driven.
@item PetrolPrice
Petrol price.
@item VanKilled
Number of van (“light goods vehicle”) drivers killed.
@item law
0/1: was the seatbelt law in effect that month?
@end table

@subsubheading Source

Harvey, A.C. (1989). @cite{Forecasting, Structural Time Series Models and
the Kalman Filter}. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 519–523.

Durbin, J. and Koopman, S. J. (2001). @cite{Time Series Analysis by State
Space Methods}. Oxford: Oxford University Press. @url{http://www.ssfpack.com/dkbook/}

@subsubheading References

Harvey, A. C. and Durbin, J. (1986). The effects of seat belt legislation
on British road casualties: A case study in structural time series
modelling. @cite{Journal of the Royal Statistical Society} series A, 149, 187–227.

@subsubheading Examples

@example
@INCLUDE_DATASET_EXAMPLE_SCRIPT{UKDriverDeaths_1.m}
@end example
